@node Are We Done Yet
@chapter Are We Done Yet?

This book takes you on a journey starting with very simple @Star{}
programs and ending with a platform that is capable of being deployed
on large scale distributed networks. In the meantime we also explored
some quite deep topics in functional programming, concurrency and
developing domain specific languages.

The truth is, of course, that we are only able to scratch the surface
of many of the topics we cover. So, the question is what next?

If you want to go deeper into @Star{} itself then the natural source
is the language definition, which can be obtained at @xref{Top,Star
Reference}, covers the language and its standard library.

If you want to go deeper in concurrency then there are several sources
one may go to. However, we recommend Reppy's @cite{Reppy,
John. Concurrent ML} original book on Concurrent ML. Our only
complaint about this book is that it is not based on @Star{}!

There is much material on agent programming of various flavors. A good
place to start is also
@url{https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Agent-oriented_programming}. For
a variety of reasons we also recommend investigating the different
specifications produced by the Foundation of Physical Intelligent
Agents @url{https://www.fipa.org,FIPA}.

Finally, dear reader, I would like to thank you for staying the
course. I would like to recommend that you check out @Star{} with
your own programs and please keep us informed of your adventures by
writing: @email{fmccabe@@gmail.com}.
