@node Why be a Star programmer?
@chapter Why be a Star programmer?

This book is about the programming language called @Star{}. Why, you
may ask, do you need to learn yet another language? We hope to answer
that question and more in the course of this book. We also aim to show
you how to program effectively in @Star{} to solve real world
problems.

@node Programming has changed
@section Programming has changed

Many of the world's most popular languages are quite old: C/C++ date
back to the 1970's and 1980's; Java dates back to 1995. Although it
sometimes does not seem like it; quite a lot has changed since those
days.

@node Programs are huge
@subsection Programs are huge
If your program is 100 lines long, it does not actually matter what
programming language you use to write it in -- unless you are learning
programming for the first time.

However, in practice, many software systems are huge. It is normal to
develop and to encounter programs measured in 100 Klocs (thousands of
lines of code) and it is not uncommon to encounter software systems
measured in the millions of lines of code.

@quotation NOTE
To put these numbers into perspective, 500KLocs is comparable to the
expected output of a programmer over their entire career. So, these
systems necessarily involve many people over many years: a team of 10
programmers would take 10 years to write 1M lines of
code.@footnote{Not including code thrown away due to changes of
requirements over that time period.}
@end quotation

Software development at this scale does not share much with developing
small systems. Large scale software is invariably a team effort,
spread over multiple years. It often involves large numbers of
components and multiple sub-systems interacting with each
other. Overall, this is a scenario of staggering heterogeneity and
complexity.

If there is one theme that is common in large code bases is that
tooling is critical: powerful IDEs can make a difference in
productivity measured in factors of 2-5. However, it is our opinion
that language tooling starts with a sound programming language design:
the sounder the foundations, the taller the structure that can be
built on it.

@node Planning for change
@subsection Planning for change
Furthermore, @emph{change} is the dominant fact of life for large
systems. Software systems evolve, grow, are repurposed to meet new
objectives, and are re-implemented to take advantage of new
technologies.

Managing change in code is often left to Source Code Control Systems;
but these systems only address part of the problem. For example,
@emph{code re-use} is also a requirement and a challenge for large
systems. In fact, one could imagine a @emph{three
Rs}@footnote{Originally, @emph{R}eading, w@emph{R}iting and
a@emph{R}ithmetic.}  for software engineering: Reuse, Repurpose, and
Refactor.

When the code base is over 500 Kloc, the theoretical probability of
being able to re-use existing code is high, the actual probability of
re-use may be very low -- software engineers may simply not be able to
find the needle in the code haystack, or, typically, the cost of
re-using code may outweigh the cost of developing from scratch.

The need to repurpose reflects the fact that requirements change and
that software written for one purpose may be used for something
different. Finally, even if the requirements dont change, the context
almost certainly will: increasing workload can lead to a need to
refactor existing code to enable it to meet changing needs.

There is another kind of change that we need to consider: the
evolution of our programming languages and other tools. A successful
programming language is part of an ecosystem. That ecosystem consists
of the language itself, together with compilers and related tools. It
also contains libraries, frameworks and packages. In many cases the
libraries that are associated with a language are far more important
than the language compiler (e.g., Java's package ecosystem is
enormous).

A well designed language is capable of supporting a large variety of
libraries without running into limitations. Furthermore, a well
designed language is structured in a way that supports its own
evolution -- new requirements can lead to new features being added to
the language.

@quotation
Managing this evolution may be the hardest aspect of designing
programming languages!
@end quotation

@node Programming safely and effectively
@subsection Programming safely and effectively

At the same time, safety and security are also critical: no-one likes
to have their private information exposed to the bad guys. Most
main-stream programming languages were designed in an era when safety
was not uppermost in programmers' minds -- usually it was
performance. Some seemingly trivial design choices -- such as C's
conventions for laying out strings in memory -- turn out to have
potentially devastating security implications.

In addition, systems that are built assuming a shielded execution
environment, behind closed doors as it were, are often actually
expected to perform in the full glare of the Internet. Hardening
programs so that they stand up to that glare can often dramatically
add to the cost of development -- both in time and in money.

@node Real-time is normal time.
@subsection Real-time is normal time.

Many kinds of business are becoming more and more `real-time': a small
-- over the order of milliseconds -- slowdown in loading a web page
can mean the loss of 5% or more of revenue for an e-commerce site; an
unrented car, like an unrented hotel room, represents a permanent loss
of business and a competitive disadvantage.

For the modern programmer, this means that applications must be
engineered from the start to be responsive and multitasking -- aspects
that challenge even the most professional of programmers.

@node This train is leaving the station
@subsection This train is leaving the station

Perhaps most importantly, we need to be able to do these things
@emph{now} -- time to market is a critical factor in many if not most
modern applications. Its no good developing the world's best widget if
you run out of `runway' trying to build it.

A major bottleneck is the relative poor productivity of most modern
programming languages. It is simply too hard to produce correct robust
code in languages like C/C++, Python etc.

Productivity is an issue for individual programmers but is especially
salient for programmer teams.

@quotation
Every successful software project involves a team.
@end quotation

The requirements for team-based development tend to put certain
aspects of programming language design into sharp focus. For example,
strong types and clear interfaces may be excellent aids for individual
programmers but they are absolutely paramount for team development.

More generally, in a competitive environment, the only way to reliably
out-perform the competition in reaching the market is to use radically
more productive technology.

@node Technology
@subsection Technology

The technology platform that programs are written for is also
changing. Just a few decades ago most computers were single-core;
nowadays most computers are multi-core and are capable of significant
parallelism.

Especially spectacular is the parallelism available in modern GPUs;
where a high end graphics processor may have thousands of cores
capable of processing instructions in parallel. We expect that the
days of personal computers with thousands of cores is not too far in
the future.

Programming parallel machines with conventional languages is an
exercise in frustration. This is because programming models that
worked in single core computers do not scale well to highly parallel
machines. One of the primary reasons for this is that state -- as
represented by the changing values of variables -- is @emph{implicit}
in procedural and object oriented languages. The implicitness of state
is important because it makes many programs easier to express. On the
other hand, that implicitness becomes a liability in multi-threaded
and parallel situations where state is no longer so well behaved.

However, @Star{} has adopted some of the recent innovations in that
make dealing with multi-tasking and parallel execution easier. These
innovations layer on top of basic features such as threading and
provide simpler models of execution than `conventional' threaded
models. @Star{}'s computation expressions combine the best of
fork-join queues and map-reduce frameworks whilst enabling a more
normal style of programming.

@node Is Star for you?
@section Is Star for you?

Choosing a programming language -- when you actually have a choice --
is highly personal. Here are some reasons to think about @Star{}.

@node If you are already a Java @asis{(or C#)}
@subsection If you are already a Java @asis{(or C#)}

Most OO languages are embracing some of the simpler features of
functional languages. Even modern Java with its lambda expressions and
stream features represents a nod to the power of functional
programming. However, at the same time, there is a substantial gap in
the capabilities of most OO languages compared to modern functional
programming languages.

Fundamentally, OO languages revolve around @emph{nouns} rather than
@emph{verbs}. Verbs (methods) are relegated to being inside the scope
of some noun (object): they are not first class.  In functional
programming languages, like @Star{}, there is more of an balance
between nouns and verbs.

It is possible to have functions that are about data; it is also quite
straightforward in functional programming languages to have data
structures with functions embedded in them. In fact, a simple
definition of a @emph{module} is a record that contains functions in
it.

While OO languages like Java provide excellent @emph{data abstraction}
tools, the same cannot be said for @emph{control abstractions}. The
result is that OO languages are `stuck in the 1970s' when it comes to
control abstractions. However, concepts such as map/reduce,
computation expressions, and continuations bring a rich suite of new
control possibilities that solve important problems in modern
programming.

Similarly, the type systems of languages like Java (or C# or C/C++)
make are not as expressive or sensitive as modern type systems in
functional languages can be. Professional programmers will recognize a
typical symptom of insufficiently expressive types: lots of casting
and dynamic meta-programming. But, while powerful, these techniques
amount to giving up on types and their important
advantages. Furthermore, contrary to many programmers' expectations, a
modern type system is quite capable of dealing statically with
scenarios that require dynamic programming in languages like Java.

@node If you are already a C++ programmer
@subsection If you are already a C++ programmer

Moving to a language like @Star{} is a radically different programming
experience for the C++ programmer. However, most of the differences
are not because @Star{} is a functional programming language. Rather,
it is because @Star{} does not abide by two of C++'s core principles:
zero-cost abstractions and compatibility with C.

While @Star{}'s compiler does not willfully make programs execute more
slowly, strict CPU performance is not the primary driver for design
features. This shows up in a desire to avoid the so-called premature
optimization problem: of optimizing the wrong feature.

In the case of @Star{} vs C++, the most salient of these is likely to
be the different ways that generic programs are compiled: C++ compiles
generic programs by constructing special case implementations for all
used versions of the generic program; whereas @Star{} constructs a
single -- type agnostic -- implementation of generic functions.

This affects many aspects of one's day-to-day usage of the language
and its tooling. One of which is that, for a compiler that has been in
daily use for over 40 years, C++ compilers are still remarkably
slow. C++ binaries can often be very large -- typically outclassed in
performance by the Java compiler.

The compatibility with C requirement has meant that C++ has to support
many programming paradigms (such as pointer arithmetic) that most
modern programming languages -- @Star{} included -- eschew.

Pointer arithmetic is known to put applications at risk of severe
security problems; and there are many modern safer alternatives (which
C++ does also support).

Beyond these, you will find @Star{} to be a rich and expressive
language; especilly if your focus is on applications rather than
systems programming.

@node If you are already a functional programmer
@subsection If you are already a functional programmer

You have many choices for functional programming languages that are
excellent. The author considers two languages that are principal
sources of inspiration for many of the functional features of @Star{}:
Haskell and Standard ML (SML) -- both of which are excellent; but not
perfect.

For the functional programmer, the principal benefits of @Star{} are
@emph{readability}, @emph{modernity} and @emph{predictability}.

One of the major drivers of the design of Haskell and (to a lesser
extent) SML is conciseness. However, conciseness is not the same as
readability. In modern software development environments there are
many stakeholders beyond the developer. Having a language that is easy
to follow by non-technical readers is a major benefit in mixed skill
teams.

Like Haskell, @Star{} has a powerful type system. @Star{}'s type
system has many features in common with Haskell's type system --
features that typically go beyond the capabilities of many OO
languages. In particular, @Star{}'s contract system is reminiscent of
Haskell's type classes; and @Star{}'s existential and higher-kinded
types give considerable expressive power to the programmer.

@Star{} does not follow all of Haskell's type features; and some type
concepts are rephrased into terminology that is more familiar to
main-stream (sic) programmers.

Like SML, @Star{} has a powerful module system. However, unlike SML's
functors, @Star{} modules are first class values. This means that
there is no artificial separation between `ordinary' programs and
`functor' programs.

The result is a balanced set of type features that provides
capabilities that scale well from small programs to large systems.

@Star{}'s evaluation is, like that of SML but unlike Haskell,
strict. We believe that that makes it significantly easier to reason
about the actual behavior and performance of programs. However,
@Star{} has a rich set of features that support productive concurrent
and parallel programming -- based on a combination of system threads
and the features of Concurrent ML.

Like SML, @Star{} is not a strictly `pure' language. This was neither
an accident nor an afterthought. Computer systems are built to fulfill
purposeful activity (although there may be many times when the actual
purpose is hard to discern). For example, if I deposit a check into my
bank account, I require that the bank's state is updated to reflect my
new balance: the world has changed as a result of my action.

However, the converse does not follow: just because the world is
stateful does not mean that all our programs should be needlessly
stateful. Much, if not most, of a given application program can and
should be crafted in a mathematical style -- the merits of functional
programming are very great.

Overall, the primary rationale in the design of @Star{} is to empower
the programmer in making obviously correct programs.

@node Design goals for Star
@section Design goals for Star

@Star{} is a multi-paradigm high-level @emph{symbolic} language. It is
designed to be scalable, readable, accurate, high performing and
extensible.

Paradoxically, scalability in a programming language is always about
large and small chunks of code. Scalability in @Star{} is fostered by
a range of elements that facilitate composition, change and re-use:

@itemize
@item
The language is strongly statically typed. This encourages both safety
and documentation.  The type system is strong enough that there is
very limited need to escape the type system. For example, modules can
be given a first-class type semantics. This is important because it
facilitates programmatic manipulation of modules in a safe manner.

@item
Programs are defined in terms of rules; for example, functions are
defined in terms of equations. Apart from being more readable, rules
are also a natural unit of change in an evolving system.

A meta-language based on logical annotations makes it possible to
build meaningfully connected documentation and facilitates processes
such as code re-use, issue tracking, and code lifetime management.
@item
The package system is intrinsically versioned and abstracted away from
any underlying storage system.
@end itemize

The syntax of @Star{} is oriented towards readability rather than
strict conciseness. The reason for this is that the programmer is only
one of the stake holders in a given program. A readable program is one
that is more easily trusted by non-programmers.

Experience also suggests that readability enhances programmer
productivity also: much of team-based development involves
comprehending and modifying other programmers' code.

@Star{} is a strongly, statically typed language. The purpose of a
strong type system is to facilitate the communication of intent of the
programmer. The purpose of static typing is to ensure that the
compiler can rapidly `fail' incorrect programs without requiring the
program to be run. Furthermore, static type checking minimizes any
run-time penalty for imposing type constraints.

Although @Star{} is strongly typed, it uses @emph{type inference} to
eliminate much of the clutter that some type systems impose on the
programmer -- which itself is a productivity sink of course.

Generally, the @emph{stronger} the type system, the more the language
system can detect errors before programs are run. In addition, the
more @emph{expressive} the type system is, the less the temptation to
try to subvert or bypass the type system.

However, even though it is technically feasible to completely
eliminate type declarations of functions; doing so is in conflict with
some of the other goals behind @Star{}. For example, type declarations
act as a form of documentation; and when there is a type error in your
program, having @emph{no} explicit type declarations can make tracking
the culprit of the error very difficult. So all top-level variable
definitions (typically functions) are required in @Star{} to have
explicit type @emph{annotations}.@footnote{The term @emph{type
declaration} is reserved for defining a new type. Variable types are
defined through @emph{type annotations}.}

@Star{} has a range of features that make exploiting parallelism
easier to manage. For example, it has support for @emph{computation
expressions} and @emph{actors}. Partitioning an application into
different @emph{agents} allows programming to follow a more human
approach. Computation expressions allow the programmer to manipulate
computations as easily as they do data values; that in turns greatly
eases the development of parallel and concurrent applications.

There is no one technology that can solve all problems. This is as
true for programming as for other domains. @Star{} supports a range of
programming paradigms that allows the developer to `use the best tool
for the job'. However, we go beyond this `swiss army knife' stance and
make it straightforward to extend the language.

Virtually every non-trivial program can be factored into a combination
of general purpose mechanism and specific policy for applying the
mechanism. @Star{} has powerful self-extension features that allow
programmers to design their own policy structures (a.k.a. domain
specific languages).

Many of @Star{}'s own features -- such as its query notation and its
actor notation -- are built using these extension mechanisms.

@node About this book
@section About this book

This book acts as an introduction to the language and to its use. The
basic features of the language are introduced; however, this is not a
reference manual: it is not intended to be a complete description of
the language.

That can be found in the @Star{} Language Definition.

Introducing a programming language like @Star{} can be a challenge in
presentation. This is because there is a significant amount of mutual
support between elements of the language.

Our strategy is to take a layered approach -- we start with simple
examples, occasionally skipping over certain aspects of the language
without explanation. Later chapters focus on deeper, more complex
topics.

For the most part, examples in the text of the book are
executable. You are encouraged to try to get them running on your own
system.

@node Getting hold of Star
@subsection Getting hold of Star
The @Star{} compiler and run-time is being developed as an open source
project on GitHub. You can access the source by cloning or downloading
the repository at

@example
github.com/frankmccabe/star
@end example

@node Typographical conventions
@subsection Typographical conventions

Any text on a programming language often has a significant number of
examples of programs and program fragments. We show these using a
typewriter-like font, often broken out in a display form:

@example
P:integer;
@dots{}
@end example

We use the @dots{} ellipsis to explicitly indicate a fragment of a
program that may not be syntactically correct as it stands.

As we noted above, @Star{} is a rich language with many features. As a
result, some parts of the text may require more careful reading, or
represent comments about potential implications of the main
text. These notes are highlighted the way this note is.

@node Acknowledgements
@subsection Acknowledgements

No-one is an island, and no project of this scale is one person's
work. I have had the great fortune to be able to develop @Star{} in
the context of real world applications solving hard
problems. Individuals have also played a large role; and it can be
hard to ensure that all are properly acknowledged: please forgive any
omissions.

Of particular significance, I would like to thank Michael Sperber for
our many discussions on the finer topics of language design; and for
his not insignificant contributions to the implementation itself.

I would also like to thank my old colleagues at Starview inc., in
particular Steve Baunach and Bob Riemenschneider who were the world's
first @Star{} programmers! In addition, I would like to thank Michael
Sperber, David Frese and Andreas Bernauer who helped with crucial
parts of the implementation of the concurrency features. I would also
like to thank Keith Clark, Kevin Cory, Prasenjit Dey, Chris Gray, Mack
Mackenzie, and Kevin Twidle for their help and advice. I would like to
acknowledge the support of Thomas Sulzbacher who originated the
project and Jerry Meerkatz for keeping the faith.

Last, but definitely not least, I would like to acknowledge the love
and support of my family; without whom none of this makes sense.
