{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1561\cocoasubrtf200
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Georgia;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Star is first of all a general purpose programming language. You can use it to effectively solve problems in many domains. Star was developed to help write analytical and statistical applications. However, it has evolved into a general purpose problem-oriented programming {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://58E8D505-C000-427E-9BCD-E4A207785552"}}{\fldrslt language.}} Many of the features and functionalities of the platform are expressed in a way that is consistent with Star. As such, it plays a key role in enabling the different elements of an application built on the platform to work smoothly together.\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi374\sl280\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Like any programming language, Star represents a distinct view point on what programming languages should be. Star is a rich functional-first language with extensibility capabilities. Star is designed to be readable, powerful, safe and extensible.\
In the spectrum of high-level and low-level programming languages, Star is at the higher end of the range. But, importantly, it's extensibility features enable it to support even higher level constructs.\
Performance is also important, of course. However, we view performance as being guided by the principle of `fast enough is good enough'. In practice, since the compiler is based on the JVM, many Star programs have a performance profile that is commensurate with comparable Java programs.\
}