@node Functional Programming
@chapter Functional Programming

Functional programming has roots that go back to the origins of
programming itself. However, it has been recently gaining in
prominence because of some of the inherent advantages in the paradigm.

@quotation
Its `declarative' nature makes reasoning about functional programs
easier than for `procedural' programs.
@end quotation

This benefits programmers in a surprising number of ways. Of course,
the most obvious one is that correctness and type safety are easier to
establish than for a program built out of assignment and for-loops.

A subtler but equally critical benefit is that it can make programming
itself easier: the programmer is free to focus on sub-problems without
unnecessary entanglement with other sub-problems.

The impact of this benefit can be quite dramatic: similar in effect to
the introduction of garbage collected memory compared to managed
memory allocation.

@node Functional First
@section Functional First
Star is a `functional-first' programming language. What this means is
that Star makes it easier and more natural to write in a functional
style. However, not all problems are best addressed in the functional
way and it is certainly possible to write procedural Star programs.

@quotation Note
One way to characterize scenarios where functional programming is
@emph{not} the best fit would be in regard to @emph{resources}. In
contradistinction to values, resources are inherently created, are
inherently not shareable and are known by name rather than by
value. Building and managing resources is generally not best done with
pure functional programming style.
@end quotation


@node Equations as Cases
@section Equations as Cases

Many functional programming languages — including Star — are based on
an `equational style'. Equational programs are written as a series of
equations; for example, in the credit function:

@example
credit:(customer)=>float.
credit(C) where inGoodStanding(C) => 0.15.
credit(C) where inDefault(C) => -0.1.
  ...
credit(_) default => 0.0.
@end example
Each line of this definition is an equation. It specifies the meaning
of the credit function in a restricted setting – the complete function
is understood by combining the cases together.

Using equations we can separate out the different cases for the
customer's credit and `work on them separately'. This allows the
programmer to focus attention and allows for rapid editing and
reorganization should the need arise.  Case-based approaches to
programming are significantly more productive than traditional
if-then-else procedural programming.

@node Equations as State
@section Equations as State

Contrary to some expectations, it is possible to write stateful
programs in a functional style. The difference is that you have to be
explicit about the state. For example, the function:

@example
addAll:(integer,integer)=>integer.
addAll(from,to) => let@{
  accum(ix,acc) where ix>=to => acc.
  accum(ix,acc) => accum(ix+1,acc+ix).
@} in accum(from,0).
@end example
is the `functional equivalent' of the normal Java loop:
@example
int addAll(int from,int to)@{
  int acc = 0;
  for(int ix=from;ix<to;ix++)
    acc = acc+ix;
  return acc;
@}
@end example
Apart from the use of recursion, the other main difference is that the
`state' – which in both cases is held in the acc variable – is
explicitly handed down the functional program, whereas the Java
program handles state implicitly.

The issue for the Java programmer is that what works for simple
programs can become unmanageable for complex multi-threaded
systems. On the other hand, while the functional programmer may be
more burdened for simple cases, complex parallel programs are not much
harder than the simple case.

Functional programming, with its declarative and explicit manipulation
of state makes crafting parallel programs significantly simpler and
less error-prone.

@node Verbs as well as Nouns
@section Verbs as well as Nouns

Object oriented languages have a very finely developed sense of the
noun. An object is intrinsically a noun; objects reference concrete or
abstract things that a programmer is manipulating. The notation of
classes, interfaces, inheritance and so on represents a powerful set
of concepts for organizing the application's nouns.

However, just as in spoken languages like English, verbs are also
important: what you do with objects is at least as important as the
objects themselves. Most OO languages do not treat verbs –
a.k.a. methods – with the same respect that they confer on nouns.

The result is that methods are written using a vocabulary that a
programmer in the 1970's would be completely familiar with – even when
the same programmer would find classes and interfaces novel concepts.

Functional languages give more weight to the verbs. A function is a
first class value and there are many ways in which functions can be
combined and abstracted. The result is that the expression of control
in a functional language can be subtler and more expressive than is
possible in most OO languages. This makes a material difference to the
productivity of the programmer and can also make a difference in the
readability of the code.

@node Non-sequential Code
@section Non-sequential Code
Another benefit that perhaps explains some of the modern excitement is
that functional programming represents a more tractable route to
developing parallel and multi-threaded programs.

A program written in a classic von Neumann style is best understood in
terms of instructions to a simple machine. Each successive instruction
modifies the state of the machine in some way – such as storing values
in cells or printing a result.

The issue with this programming model is that modern machines do not
fit the original von Neumann model very well. It is normal now for a
single computer to have eight `cores', which permit up to 16
independently executing tasks to execute in parallel. Furthermore,
modern graphics processors come with thousands of cores — which do not
necessarily have to be processing graphics!

Traditional procedural programming languages have a very difficult
time with multi-threaded and parallel programs. Because of the
complexity of writing them safely, they must currently be written by
`programming masters'.


