@node Concurrent Execution
@chapter Concurrent Execution
@cindex concurrent execution
@cindex execution,parallel

Concurrent and parallel execution involves two inter-related concepts:
the @code{task} and the @code{rendezvous}. A @code{task} is a form of
@refer{ComputationExpression} with support for parallel and
asynchronous execution.  A @code{rendezvous} represents a 'meeting
place' between two or more independent activities. In particular,
messages may be exchanged between @code{task}s at a @code{rendezvous}.

The concurrency concepts and features are inspired by similar features
found in Concurrent ML @cite{reppy:99}; which, in turn, have similar
underpinnings as Hoare's Concurrent Sequential Processes
@cite{hoare:85}.

@node Tasks
@section Tasks
The foundation for concurrency is the @refer{TaskExpression}. A
@code{task} is a @refer{ComputationExpression} that denotes a
computation that may be performed in parallel with other computations.

@node Fiber Expressions
@subsection Fiber Expressions

A @code{task} expression consists of a @code{task}-labeled @refer{BlockAction}.

@float BNF,taskExpressionFig
@caption{Fiber Expression}
@display
@var{ActionExpression} ::+ @refer{TaskExpression}
@anchored{TaskExpression} ::= @code{task} @refer{BlockAction}
@end display
@end float

@refer{TaskExpression}s denote computations that are expected to be
performed asynchronously or in parallel.@footnote{Merely using a
@code{task} expression is not sufficient to make a computation
parallel. For that, use the @code{bckground} operator.}

A @code{task} is 'created' with the @code{task} notation:
@example
T = task@{ logMsg(info,"This is a task action") @}
@end example

@quotation Note
Apart from @code{background} tasks (see @refer{backgroundTask}), a
@refer{TaskExpression} is not 'started' until it is @code{perform}ed
or @code{valof} is applied.
@end quotation
In order to start the task, the task must be @code{perform}ed:
@example
perform T
@end example

This is the same as for all @refer{ActionExpression}s.

@refer{TaskExpression}s may have values; and may be composed and constructed like other expressions. For example, the function:
@example
tt(X) => task@{
  Y = 2;
  valis X+Y
@}
@end example

represents a rather elaborate way of adding 2 to a number. As with
@code{T} above, the expression:
@example
I = tt(3)
@end example

is not an @code{integer} but an @code{integer}-valued
@refer{TaskExpression}. The value returned may be extracted using
@code{valof}:
@example
Five = valof I
@end example

As with all @refer{ComputationExpression}s, if there is a possibility
that the @refer{TaskExpression} will fail, then it shoud be
encapsulated in a @code{try}-@code{catch} block:

@example
ive = valof @{
  try I catch @{
    logMsg(info,"Was not expecting this");
    valis 0
  @}
@}
@end example

@node The @code{task} type
@subsection The @code{task} type
The @code{task} type is a standard type that is used to represent
@refer{TaskExpression}s. 

@example
task[e] <~ @{@}
@end example

@quotation Note
Although the `task' type is implemented as a normal type, it's
definition is hidden as its internals are not relevant to the
programmer. Hence, it is declared using a @refer{TypeExistsStmt}
statement rather than with a @refer{AlgebraicTypeDefinition}
statement.
@end quotation

@node Fiber-related Functions
@section Fiber-related Functions
@cindex task functions

@node Background Fiber
@subsection Background Fiber
The @code{background} function takes a @code{task} and performs it in
the background (i.e., in parallel with the invoking call). The value
of the @code{background} task is the same as the value of the
backgrounded task.
@example
background : all t ~~ (task[t])=>task[t]
@end example

@quotation Note
@code{background} is a standard prefix operator -- with priority 950 -- 
hence a call to @code{background} may be written without parentheses.
@end quotation

@node Rendezvous
@section Rendezvous
[[rendezvous]]

A rendezvous is a coordination point between two or more independent tasks. Typically, these represent message communication but can involve time-outs, i/o operations and so on.

@node The @code{rendezvous} Type
@subsection The @code{rendezvous} Type
[[rendezvousType]]
The @code{rendezvous} type is a standard type that denotes a rendezvous.
@example
rendezvous has kind type of type;

@quotation Note
It is an opaque type -- i.e., its existence is public, but its definition is not.
@end quotation

@node Waiting for a Rendezvous
@subsection Waiting for a Rendezvous
[[waitfor]]
The @code{wait for} function is used to wait at a rendezvous until the rendezvous 'occurs'.

@example
wait for has type for all t such that (rendezvous of t)=>task of t


@quotation Note
The @code{wait for} function name is also a multi-word prefix operator defined:
@example
\#prefix("wait for",999);

@end quotation

Waiting for a @code{rendezvous} is the central mechanism that multiple @code{task}s may use to coordinate their activities.

The result of waiting for a @code{rendezvous} is also a @code{task}. This means, for example, that there can be a distinction between a 'coordination point' between @code{task}s and the computation enabled by that coordination.

@node The @code{alwaysRv} Rendezvous Function
@subsection The @code{alwaysRv} Rendezvous Function
[[alwaysRendezvous]]
@cindex rendezvous,alwaysRv@@code{alwaysRv}

The @code{alwaysRv} returns a @code{rendezvous} that is always 'ready'. It has a single argument which is returned -- wrapped as a @code{task} -- by @code{wait for}.

@example
alwaysRv has type for all t such that (t)=>rendezvous of t


In effect, the @code{alwaysRv} rendezvous obeys the law:
\begin{equation*}
@code{wait for alwaysRv(X)}\ \equiv\ @code{task\{ valis X\}}
\end{equation*}

@node The @code{neverRv} Rendezvous
@subsection The @code{neverRv} Rendezvous
[[neverRendezvous]]
@cindex rendezvous,never@@code{never}

The @code{neverRv} @code{rendezvous} is _never_ 'ready'.

@example
neverRv has type for all t such that rendezvous of t


@quotation Note
Waiting for a @code{neverRv} rendezvous is rarely useful by itself; but is especially useful when combined with @code{guardRv}.
@end quotation

@node The @code{chooseRv} Rendezvous Function
@subsection The @code{chooseRv} Rendezvous Function
[[chooseRvFun]]
@cindex rendezvous,choose@@code{choose}
@cindex multiple rendezvous
@cindex selecting from many rendezvous

The @code{chooseRv} rendezvous function is used to combine a collection of rendezvous into a single non-deterministic disjunction. Waiting for a @code{chooseRv} rendezvous is successful if one of its 'arms' is successful.

@example
chooseRv has type for all s,t such that (s)=>rendezvous of t
                  where sequence over s determines rendezvous of t


The argument to @code{chooseRv} is a @code{sequence} of @code{rendezvous} values -- any of which may activate in order to activate the @code{chooseRv}.

The @code{chooseRv} rendezvous combinator is important because it allows a one-of selection from multiple alternatives.

@quotation Note
Waiting on a @code{chooseRv} rendezvous is successful when one of the @code{rendezvous} in its argument collection becomes available -- i.e., a call of @code{wait for} on the @code{chooseRv} collection completes when @code{wait for} would complete on one of the elements of that collection.

If more than one element @code{rendezvous} is ready then one of them will be selected non-deterministically.
@end quotation

@quotation Note
The @code{chooseRv} @code{rendezvous} is analogous to the Unix-style @code{select} function; except that rather than being limited to waiting for an I/O descriptor to be ready, the @code{chooseRv} rendezvous allows many different forms of rendezvous to be selected from.
@end quotation

For example, the rendezvous expression:
@example
chooseRv(list of [sendRv(Ch,"M"), timeoutRv(10)])

can be used to represent a combination of trying to send a message on the @code{Ch} channel -- see @refer{sendRvFun} -- or if no one received the message within 10 milliseconds then giving up on the send.

@node The @code{guardRv} Rendezvous
@subsection The @code{guardRv} Rendezvous
[[guardRvFun]]
@cindex rendezvous,guardRv@@code{guardRv}
@cindex guarded rendezvous

A @code{guardRv} function is used to dynamically compute a @code{rendezvous}. Applied just before a rendezvous is waited on, the @code{quardRv} allows the precise rendezvous to be computed dynamically.

@example
guardRv has type for all t such that
                 (task of rendezvous of t) => rendezvous of t


The argument to @code{guardRv} is a @code{task}; the @code{valof} of which is the actual @code{rendezvous}. Guards are evaluated -- @code{valof}'ed -- immediately prior to actually waiting for the @code{rendezvous}.

A classic use of @code{guardRv} is to enable a semantic condition to be satisfied before enabling a particular @code{rendezvous}. For example, if it 'did not make sense' to accept a message on a channel unless a particular @code{queue} was non-empty could be represented with:
@example
var Q := queue of [];
...
testQ() is task\{
  if empty(Q) then
    valis neverRv
  else
    valis recvRv(Ch)
\}
...
wait for guardRv(testQ())


@node The @code{wrapRv} Rendezvous Function
@subsection The @code{wrapRv} Rendezvous Function
[[wrapRvFun]]
@cindex wrap rendezvous
@cindex rendezvous,wrap

A @code{wrapRv} can be used to 'convert' a @code{rendezvous} of one type to another form. This is often used to enable one @code{rendezvous} to 'count as' another @code{rendezvous}.

@example
wrapRv has type for all a,b such that
                (rendezvous of a, (a) => task of b) => rendezvous of b


The first argument of @code{wrapRv} is the @code{rendezvous} that is actually waited on. The second argument is a function that takes the result of that @code{rendezvous} and returns a new @code{task} using that return value.

One use for the @code{wrapRv} function is to perform another @code{rendezvous} wait. For example:
@example
requestReply(SCh,RCh,Msg) is guardRv(sendRv(Ch,Msg),
                                (_) => wait for recvRv(RCh))

will send a @code{Msg} on the 'send channel' @code{SCh}; and once that message was successfully sent will wait for a reply on the @code{RCh} channel.

@code{requestRepl} is a @code{rendezvous}-valued function; and so can be used in conjunction with other @code{rendezvous} expressions. For example, to send a message to two other @code{task}s but only wait for one result we might use:
@example
def R is valof wait for chooseRv\{
  requestReply(S1,RCh);
  requestReply(S2,RCh)
  \}


@node The @code{withNackRv} Rendezvous
@subsection The @code{withNackRv} Rendezvous
[[nackRvFun]]
The @code{withNackRv} function can be used to discover if another rendezvous _was not_ triggered.
@example
withNackRv has type for all t such that
                    ((rendezvous of ())=>rendezvous of t)=>rendezvous of t


The argument to @code{withNackRv} is a function which is invoked during synchronization -- analogously to the @code{guardRv} function -- to construct the @code{rendezvous} to be monitored. If that @code{rendezvous} is _not_ selected -- in a call to @code{wait for} -- then a special _abort_ rendezvous _is_ selected. That abort rendezvous is the one that is passed in to the argument function.

For example, in the expression:
@example
withNackRv(F)

@code{F} should be a function that takes a @code{rendezvous} and returns a @code{rendezvous}:
@example
F(A) is recvRv(Ch)

The type of @code{A} is @code{rendezvous of ()}.

Waiting on @code{withNackRv(F)} is similar to a @code{wait for} the @code{rendezvous}
@example
recvRv(Ch)


If this @code{rendezvous} is selected then nothing further happens.

However, if this @code{rendezvous} were in a @code{chooseRv} and a different @code{rendezvous} were selected then `A' becomes 'available'. In effect, @code{A} being active means that the @code{recvRv} was not activated.

A slightly more complex example should illustrate this:
@example
showMsg(Ch) is let\{
  F(A) is valof\{
    ignore background task \{
      ignore wait for A; -- will block unless recvRv not active
      logMsg(info,"Did not receive message");
    \}
    valis recvRv(Ch)
  \}
\} in withNackRv(F)

If we used this to @code{wait for} a message; perhaps with a @code{timeoutRv}:
@example
wait for chooseRv(list of [
  showMsg(Chnl),
  timeoutRv(1000)
])

then, if a timeout occurred the message
@example
Did not receive message

would appear in the log.

@node The @code{timeoutRv} Rendezvous
@subsection The @code{timeoutRv} Rendezvous
[[timeoutRvFun]]
@cindex rendezvous,timeout

The @code{timeoutRv} function returns a @code{rendezvous} that will be available a certain number of milliseconds after the start of the @code{wait for}.
@example
timeoutRv has type (long)=>rendezvous of ()

The timeout interval starts at some point after the @code{wait for} function has been entered; and it is guaranteed to be 'available' some time _after_ the required number of milliseconds.
@quotation Note
It is not possible to guarantee a precise timeout interval -- in the sense of some computation proceeding at exactly the right moment.

Thus, any time-sensitive computation triggered by @code{timeoutRv} should takes its own measurement of the 'current' time when it is activated.
@end quotation

\noindent
The @code{timeoutRv} is most often used in conjunction with other @code{rendezvous} functions;  typically a message receive or message send @code{rendezvous}.

For example, the expression:
@example
wait for chooseRv(list of [
  sendRv(Ch,"Hello"),
  timeoutRv(100)
]

represents an attempt to send the @code{"Hello"} message on the @code{Ch} channel; but the message send will be abandoned shortly after 100 milliseconds have elapsed.

@node The @code{atDateRv} Rendezvous Function
@subsection The @code{atDateRv} Rendezvous Function
[[atDateRvFun]]
@cindex rendezvous,timeout
The @code{atDateRv} is similar to the @code{timeoutRv} rendezvous; except that instead of a fixed interval of milliseconds the timeout is expressed as a particular @code{date} value.
@example
atDateRv has type (date)=>rendezvous of ()

The @code{atDateRv} will be triggered some time after the specified date.

@node Channels and Messages
@section Channels and Messages
[[channels]]

A channel is a typed communications channel between @code{task}s. In order for a @code{task} to 'send a message' to another @code{task}, they would share the channel object itself and then the receiver would use @code{recvRv} to wait for the message and the sender would use @code{sendRv} to send the message.

@node The @code{channel} Type
@subsection The @code{channel} Type
[[channelType]]

@example
channel has kind type of type;


Like the @code{rendezvous} and @code{task} types, the @code{channel} type is _opaque_.

@node The @code{channel} Function
@subsection The @code{channel} Function
[[channelFun]]

The @code{channel} function is used to create channels.
@example
channel has type for all t such that ()=>channel of t

Each created channel may be used for sending and receiving multiple messages. However, the channel is typed; i.e., only messages of that type may be communicated.

Channels are multi-writer multi-reader channels: any number of tasks may be reading and writing to a channel. However, any given communication is between two tasks: one sender and one receiver.

If more than one @code{task} is trying to send a message then it is non-deterministic which message is sent. If more than one @code{task} is trying to receive a message then only one will get the message.

Message receives and sends may take place in either order. However, message communication is _synchronous_. I.e., both sender and receiver are blocked until a communication occurs.

An immediate implication of synchronous communication is that there is no buffer of messages associated with @code{channel}s.

@node Receive Message Rendezvous
@subsection Receive Message Rendezvous
[[recvRvFun]]
The @code{recvRv} function takes a @code{channel} and returns a @code{rendezvous} that represents a wait for a message on the @code{channel}.

@example
recvRv has type for all t such that (channel of t)=>rendezvous of t


To actually receive a message on a channel, first the @code{rendezvous} must be created, then it must be 'waited for', and then the message itself is extracted from the resulting @code{task}:
@example
Data is valof wait for recvRv(_Channel_)


As noted in @refer{channelFun}, if more than one @code{task} is actively waiting for a message on the same channel then it is non-deterministic which @code{task} will 'get' the first message. All other @code{task}s will continue to be blocked until a subsequent message is sent.

@node Send Message Rendezvous
@subsection Send Message Rendezvous
[[sendRvFun]]
The @code{sendRv} function is used to send messages on @code{channel}s.

@example
sendRv has type for all t such that (channel of t,t)=>rendezvous of ()


The result of a @code{sendRv} function is a @code{rendezvous}. Waiting on this @code{rendezvous} amounts to the attempt to send the message on the @code{channel}.

@quotation Note
Note that the type of @code{rendezvous} returned by @code{sendRv} is
@example
rendezvous of ()

I.e., there is no 'value' associated with a successful send message.
@end quotation
