@node Fibers
@chapter Fibers

A fiber is a computation whose execution can be managed. Fibers can be
created, suspended and resumed. Fibers also have identity which allows
correlation of fibers when managing sets of fibers.

@quotation Note
The @code{fiber} concept is a relatively low-level feature of
@Star{}. Other, higher-level, features are constructed as a layer on
top of fibers; including:

@itemize @bullet
@item
A @code{fiber} expression denotes a computation that can be scheduled
independently of other actions.

This is analogous to coroutining in other programming languages.
@item
A @code{generator} expression is used to define so-called yield-style generators.
@end itemize

@end quotation

@node Fiber Type
@section Fiber Type
@cindex type, fiber
@cindex fiber type

The @code{fiber} type is used to characterize the type of fiber expressions. It takes the form:
@float BNF,fiberTypeFig
@caption{Fiber Type Syntax}
@display
@refer{Type}::+=@refer{FiberType}

@anchored{FiberType} ::= @code{fiber} @code{[} @refer{Type} @code{,} @refer{Type} @code{]}
@end display
@end float

The second type argument refers to values that the fiber may suspend
with (see @refer{Suspend} and @refer{RetireAction}) and the first type
argument refers to values that the fiber may be resumed with (see
@refer{Resume}).

@node Fiber Expression
@section Fiber Expression

A @code{fiber} expression evaluates to a new fiber. It contains a set of
actions to perform as the fiber. 

@float BNF,fiberFig
@caption{Fiber Expression Syntax}
@display
@refer{Expression}::+=@refer{FiberExpression}

@anchored{FiberExpression} ::= @code{fiber} @refer{BlockAction}
  | @code{fiber} @refer{Expression}
  | @refer{SuspendExpression}
  | @refer{ResumeExpression}
@end display
@end float

For example, in the @code{fiber} expression:
@example
fiber@{
  let@{
    yildFn:((),e)=>().
    yildFn(_,E) => valof@{
      case suspend .yild(E) in @{
       .next => valis ().
      @}
    @}
  @} in @{_iter(L,(),yildFn)@};
  retire .end
@}
@end example
we use a @refer{LetAction} to introduce a local function definition --
@code{yildFn} -- and pass it to the standard contract method --
@code{_iter} -- (which is defined in the @code{iter} contract).

In addition to the actions, there are two special variables defined
within the body of the @code{fiber} expression: @code{this} and
@code{first}:

@table @code
@item this
The @code{this} keyword is bound to the currently executing
@code{fiber} (and has the same type). This is one of the primary ways
in which a @code{fiber} is given its own identity.
@item first
The @code{first} keyword is bound to the initial event that is passed
to the @code{fiber} when it is first resumed.

@quotation Note
When @code{fiber}s are created, they are in suspended state: i.e., the
code within the @code{fiber} expression is not executed
immediately. The @code{fiber} starts executing only when it is resumed
-- using the @refer{ResumeAction}
@end quotation
@end table

@node Suspend
@subsection Suspend

The @refer{Suspend} is used when a fiber wishes to suspend
itself. There are two arguments to the @refer{Suspend}: the
identity of the fiber to be suspended, a value that determines the
@emph{suspension event}:

@float BNF,suspendFig
@caption{Suspend Syntax}
@display
@anchored{SuspendExpression}::=
    @refer{Expression} @code{suspend} @refer{Expression}
  | @code{suspend} @refer{Expression}
@end display
@end float

The types of the fiber, the event and the action case must match up; i.e., given
@example
@var{T} suspend @var{E} in @{@var{P@sub{1}} => @var{A@sub{1}}. .. @var{P@sub{n}} => @var{A@sub{n}}@}
@end example
then @code{@var{T}} must be of type
@example
fiber[@var{R},@var{S}]
@end example
for some @code{@var{S}} and @code{@var{R}}; the type of @code{@var{E}}:
@example
@code{@var{E}} : @code{@var{S}}
@end example
and the left hand sides of the response case -- @code{@var{P@sub{i}}}
-- must have type @code{@var{R}}.

In effect, the fiber type determines the legal events that the fiber
may be suspended with (and the legal events that the fiber may be
resumed with).

@quotation Note
When used directly within the text of a @code{fiber} expression, there
is a slightly shorter form of @code{suspend}:
@example
suspend @var{E} in @{@var{P@sub{1}} => @var{A@sub{1}}. .. @var{P@sub{n}} => @var{A@sub{n}}@}
@end example
This may be used when a fiber is directly suspending itself within the
@code{fiber} expression. This action is equivalent to:
@example
@code{this} @code{suspend} @var{E} @code{in} @{@var{P@sub{1}} => @var{A@sub{1}}. .. @var{P@sub{n}} => @var{A@sub{n}}@}
@end example

The @code{this} keyword is established within the scope of a
@code{fiber} expression; it allows fibers to discover their own
identity.
@end quotation

@node Resume
@subsection Resume

A @refer{Resume} is used when a fiber wishes to resume another fiber.
There are two arguments to the @refer{Resume}: the
identity of the fiber to be resumed, and a value that determines the
@emph{resumption event}:

@float BNF,resumeFig
@caption{Resume Syntax}
@display
@anchored{ResumeExpression}::= @refer{Expression} @code{resume} @refer{Expression}
@end display
@end float

As with @code{Suspend}, the types of the fiber, the event and
the action case must match up; i.e., given
@example
@var{T} @code{resume} @var{E}
@end example
then @code{@var{T}} must be of type
@example
fiber[@var{R},@var{S}]
@end example
for some @code{@var{R}} and @code{@var{S}}; the type of @code{@var{E}}:
@example
@code{@var{E}} : @code{@var{R}}
@end example
and the left hand sides of the response case -- @code{@var{P@sub{i}}}
-- must have type @code{@var{S}} -- which will be used to match
against the suspension event.

The @refer{Suspend} and @refer{Resume} are quite symmetric.

@node Retiring a Fiber
@subsection Retiring a Fiber

The @refer{RetireAction} is used when a fiber wishes to retire and no
longer continue execution. This is the primary means by which a fiber
designates that it is completed. Whether the fiber is successful or not
is determined by the value of the event it signals.

@float BNF,retireActionFig
@caption{Retire Action Syntax}
@display
@anchored{RetireAction}::=
  @refer{Expression} @code{retire} @refer{Expression}
  | @code{retire} @refer{Expression}
@end display
@end float

The types of the fiber and the event must match up; i.e., given
@example
@var{T} retire @var{E}
@end example
then @code{@var{T}} must be of type
@example
fiber[@var{R},@var{S}]
@end example
for some @code{@var{S}} and @code{@var{R}}; the type of @code{@var{E}}:
@example
@code{@var{E}} : @code{@var{S}}
@end example

In the case where the @refer{RetireAction} is being performed withing
the lexical scope of the @code{fiber} expression, the shorter form --
which omits the identifier for the fiber being retired -- may be
used. As with the @refer{SuspendAction} this is equivalent to using
the @code{this} keyword to identify the retiring fiber.

