@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction to Star

@menu
* About this reference::
@end menu

@noindent
@Star{} is a high-level symbolic programming language oriented to
the needs of large-scale high performance processing in modern
parallel and distributed computing environments.

@Star{} is a @emph{functional-first} language -- in that functions
and other programs are first class values. However, it is explicitly
not a pure language: it has support for updatable variables and
structures. However, its bias is definitely in favor of functional
programming and in order to get the best value from programming in
@Star{}, such side-effecting features should be used sparingly.

@Star{} is strongly, statically, typed. What this means is that
all programs and all values have a single type that is determined by a
combination of type inference and explicit type annotations.

While this definitely increases the initial burden of the programmer;
we believe that correctness of programs is a long-term productivity
gain -- especially for large programs developed by teams of
programmers.

The type language is very rich; including polymorphic types, type
constraints and higher-rank and higher kinded types. Furthermore,
except in cases where higher-ranked types are required, type inference
is used extensively to reduce the burden of type bureaucracy on
programmers.

@Star{} is extensible; there are many mechanisms designed to allow
extensions to the language to be designed simply and
effectively. Using such techniques can significantly ease the burden
of writing applications.

@node About this reference
@section About this Reference

@menu
* Metagrammar::
* Typographical Conventions::
@end menu

@noindent
This reference is the language definition of the @Star{}
language. It is intended to be thorough and as precise as possible in
the features discussed. However, where appropriate, we give simple
examples as illustrative background to the specification itself.

@node Metagrammar
@subsection Metagrammar

@noindent
Throughout this document we introduce many syntactic features of the
language. We use a variant of traditional BNF grammars to do this. The
meta-grammar can be described using itself; as shown in @pxref{metaGrammar}.

@float BNF,metaGrammar
@caption{MetaGrammar Used in this Reference}
@shortcaption{MetaGrammar}
@display
@var{MetaGrammar} ::= @var{Production} @dots{} @var{Production}
@var{Production} ::= @var{NonTerminal} @code{'::='} @var{Body}
@var{Production} ::+= @var{NonTerminal} @code{'::+='} @var{Body}
@var{Body} ::= @var{Quoted} | @var{NonTerminal} | @var{Choice} | @var{Optional} | @var{Sequence} | @code{'('} @var{Body} @code{')'}
@var{Quoted} ::= '@var{Characters}'
@var{NonTerminal} ::= @var{Identifier}
@var{Choice} ::= @var{Body} @code{'|'} @dots{} @code{'|'} @var{Body}
@var{Optional} ::= [ @var{Body} ]
@var{Sequence} ::= @var{Body}  @var{op} @dots{} @var{op} @var{Body} [@code{'+'}]
@end display
@end float

Some grammar combinations are worth explaining as they occur quite
frequently and may not be standard in BNF-style grammars. For example
the rules for actions contain:

@example
@var{Action} ::= '@{' @var{Action} ';' .. ';' @var{Action} '@}'
@end example

This grammar rule defines an @var{Action} as a possibly empty sequence of
@var{Action}s separated by semi-colons and enclosed in braces -- i.e.,
the classic definition of a block.

The rule:
@example
@var{Decimal} ::= @var{Digit} .. @var{Digit}+
@end example

@noindent
denotes a definition in which there must be at least one occurrence of
a @var{Digit}; in this case there is also no separator between the
@var{Digit}s.

Occasionally, where a non-terminal is not conveniently captured in a
single production, later sections will add to the definition of the
non-terminal. This is signaled with a @code{::+=} production, as in:

@example
@var{Expression} ::+= @var{ListLiteral}
@end example

which signals that, in addition
to previously defined expressions, a @var{ListLiteral} is also an
@var{Expression}.

@node Typographical Conventions
@subsection Typographical Conventions
@cindex typographical conventions

@noindent
Any text on a programming language often has a significant number of
examples of programs and program fragments. In this reference, we show
these using a `typewriter`-like font, often broken out in a display
form:

@example
...
P : integer
...
@end example

We use the @code{...} ellipsis to explicitly indicate a fragment of a
program that is embedded in a context.
@cindex ellipsis
@cindex ...


Occasionally, we have to show a somewhat generic fragment of a program
where you, the programmer, are expected to put your own text in. We
highlight such areas using @code{@var{this}} font:

@example
(@var{Args}) => @var{Expr}
@end example


This kind of notation is intended to suggest that @code{@var{Args}} and
@code{@var{Expr}} are a kind of @emph{meta-variable} which are intended to be
replaced by specific text.

@quotation TIP
Some parts of the text require more careful reading, or represent
comments about potential implications of the main text. These notes
are highlighted the way this note is. @footnote{Notes which are not
really part of the main exposition, but still represent nuggets of
wisdom are relegated to footnotes.}
@end quotation

@quotation WARNING
Occasionally, there are areas where the programmer may
accidentally `trip over' some feature of the language.
@end quotation
