@node Input and Output
@chapter Input and Output
@cindex io

Input and output features include mechanisms for reading and writing
streams of characters, mechanisms for accessing and navigating file
directories and mechanisms for the appropriate formatting and parsing
of data.

There are several 'flavors' of i/o features:

@itemize
@item streaming,
@item regular,
@item async
@end itemize


@node Streaming Input
@section Streaming Input

The file input streaming primitives represent input as a stream of
entities. Such input streams are parseable by @refer{The stream
Contract}. Each stream presents a stream of a particular type;
currently, this is one of @code{char}, @code{string} or
@code{vect[integer]} -- depending on which function is used to access
it.


@node inCharStream
@subsection @code{inCharStream}

The @code{inCharStream} function returns an @code{inputStream} of
@code{char}acters:

@example
public inCharStream:(string) => inputStream[char] raises ioException.
@end example

Each character in the stream is accessed via the @code{stream}
contract. For example, a function that counts the length of a file (in
unicode code points) might look like:

@example
countCPs:(string)=>integer raises ioException.
countCPs(Fl) => let@{.
   count([],Cx) => Cx.
   count([_,..Rst],Cx) => count(Rst,Cx+1)
   .@} in count(inCharStream(Fl),0)
@end example

However, since the @code{folding} contract is also implemented for
@code{inputStream}s, a more succinct implementation of @code{countCPs}
would be:

@example
countCPs(Fl) => foldLeft((_,Cx)=>Cx+1,0,inCharStream(Fl)).
@end example

@node inLineStream
@subsection @code{inLineStream}

The @code{inLineStream} function creates a stream of lines. Each
element of the stream is a @code{string} representing a line of the
input stream.

@example
public inLineStream:(string) => inputStream[string] raises ioException.
@end example

Lines in the input are delineated as per the locale of the operating
system: separated by newline characters in Unix & Mac OS, and crlf in
Windows.

For example, a function that counts the length of a file (in
unicode code points) might look like:

@example
countLns:(string)=>integer raises ioException.
countLns(Fl) => let@{.
   count([],Cx) => Cx.
   count([_,..Rst],Cx) => count(Rst,Cx+1)
   .@} in count(inLineStream(Fl),0)
@end example

@quotation Note
The @code{inLineStream} is typically more efficient than
@code{inCharStream} since each access to I/O is for a line rather than
simply a single character.
@end quotation



@node The ioHandle Type
@section The @code{ioHandle} Type



Reading from and writing to files is mediated through the opaque
@code{ioHandle}; which is a resource that represents an open file.
