@node Lexical Syntax
@chapter Lexical Syntax


@menu
* Characters::
* Number Literals::
* Characters and Strings::
* Identifiers::
* Punctuation::
@end menu

@node Characters
@section Characters
@cindex character set
@cindex Unicode

@Star{} source text is based on the Unicode character set. This
means that identifiers and string values may directly use any Unicode
characters. However, all the standard operators and keywords fall in
he ASCII subset of Unicode.

@menu
* Comments and White Space::
@end menu

@node Comments and White Space
@subsection Comments and White Space
@cindex white space

@noindent
Input is tokenized according to rules that are similar to most modern
programming languages: contiguous sequences of characters are assumed
to belong to the same token unless the class of character changes --
for example, a punctuation mark separates sequences of letter
characters. In addition, white space and comments serve as token
boundaries; otherwise white space and comments are ignored by the
higher-level semantics of the language.

@float BNF,ignorableFig
@caption{Ignorable Characters}
@display
@anchored{Ignorable} ::= @refer{LineComment}
  | @refer{BlockComment}
  | @refer{WhiteSpace}
@end display
@end float

There are two forms of comment: line comment and block comment.

@node Line Comment
@subsubsection Line Comment
@cindex comment,line
@cindex line comment
A line comment consists of a @code{--@spce{}} or a @code{--\t} followed by all
characters up to the next new-line. Here, @code{\t} refers to the
Horizontal Tab.

@float BNF,lineCommentFig
@caption{Line Comment}
@display
@anchored{LineComment} ::= (@code{'--@spce{}'} | @code{'--\t'}) @refer{Char} @dots{} @refer{Char} @code{'\n'}
@end display
@end float

@node Block Comment
@subsubsection Block Comment
@cindex comment,block
@cindex block comment
A block comment consists of the characters @code{/*} followed by any
characters and terminated by the characters @code{*/}.

@float BNF,blockCommentFig
@caption{Block Comment}
@display
@anchored{BlockComment} ::= @code{'/*'} @refer{Char} @dots{} @refer{Char} @code{'*/'}
@end display
@end float

Each form of comment overrides the other: a @code{/*} sequence in a
line comment is @emph{not} the start of a block comment, and a @code{-- }
sequence in a block comment is similarly not the start of a
line comment but the continuation of the block comment.

@node White Space
@subsubsection White Space
@cindex white space
White space characters are used to help delimit other
tokens. Except when they occur in a @refer{StringLiteral} or in a
@refer{QuotedIdentifier} they serve no other purpose.

@float BNF,whiteSpaceFig
@caption{White Space}
@display
@anchored{WhiteSpace} ::= @code{' '} | @code{'\n'} |@code{'\r'} | @code{'\f'} |@code{'\t'}
@end display
@end float

@node Number Literals
@section Number Literals
@cindex numeric literals
@cindex literal,number

The numeric values include integer values, floating point values,
decimal values and character codes. The latter are integers that
represent the Unicode code points of particular characters.

@float BNF,numericFig
@caption{Numeric Literals}
@display
@anchored{NumericLiteral} ::= @refer{Decimal}
  | @refer{Hexadecimal}
  | @refer{FloatingPoint}
  | @refer{CharacterCode}
@end display
@end float

@quotation TIP
The lexical syntax for numeric values is for positive values only. The
interpretation of negative numeric literals is part of the grammar,
not the lexical notation.
@end quotation

@node Integer Tokens
@subsection Integer Tokens
@cindex integer
@cindex number,integer
@cindex syntax,integer

@noindent
An integer is written using the normal decimal notation (@pxref{decimalFig}):
@example
1  34 -99
@end example

@quotation TIP
All integers are represented as at least 64 bit values.
@end quotation

@float BNF,decimalFig
@caption{Decimal Literals}
@display
@anchored{Decimal} ::=@refer{Digit} @dots{} @refer{Digit}+
@anchored{Digit} ::= @code{'0'}|@code{'1'}|@code{'2'}|@code{'3'}|@code{'4'}|@code{'5'}|@code{'6'}|@code{'7'}|@code{'8'}|@code{'9'}
@end display
@end float

@node Hexadecimal Integers 
@subsection Hexadecimal Integers
@cindex hexadecimal
@cindex number,hexadecimal
@cindex syntax,hexadecimal

@noindent
A hexadecimal number is an integer written using hexadecimal
notation. A hexadecimal number consists of a leading @code{0x}
followed by a sequence of hex digits. For example,

@example
0x0 0xff
0x34fe
@end example
are all hexadecimals.

@float BNF,hexadecimalFig
@caption{Hexadecimal numbers}
@display
@anchored{Hexadecimal}::= @code{'0x'} @refer{Hex} @dots{} @refer{Hex}+
@anchored{Hex}::= @code{'0'}|@code{'1'}|@code{'2'}|@code{'3'}|@code{'4'}|@code{'5'}|@code{'6'}|@code{'7'}|@code{'8'}|@code{'9'}|@code{'a'}|@code{'b'}|@code{'c'}|@code{'d'}|@code{'e'}|@code{'f'}
@end display
@end float

@node Floating Point Numbers
@subsection Floating Point Numbers
@cindex floating point
@cindex number,floating point
@cindex syntax,floating point number

Floating point numbers are written using a notation that is
familiar. For example,

@example
234.45  1.0e45
@end example

See @ref{floatingPointFig} for a complete syntax diagram for floating point numbers.

@float BNF,floatingPointFig
@caption{Floating Point numbers}
@display
@anchored{FloatingPoint} ::= @refer{Digit}@dots{}@refer{Digit}+ @code{'.'} @refer{Digit}@dots{}@refer{Digit}+ [@code{'e'}[@code{'-'}]@refer{Digit}@dots{}@refer{Digit}+]]
@end display
@end float

@quotation TIP
All floating point number are represented to a precision that is at
least equal to 64-bit double precision. There is no equivalent of
single-precision floating pointer numbers.
@end quotation

@node Character Codes
@subsection Character Codes
@cindex character code
@cindex number,character code
@cindex syntax,character code
@noindent
The character code notation allows a number to be based on the coding
value of a character. Any Unicode character code point can be entered
in this way:
@example
0cX 0c[ 0c\n 0c
@end example

For example, @code{0c\n} is the code point associated with the new
line character, i.e., its value is @code{10}.

@quotation TIP
Unicode has the capability to represent up to one million character code points.
@end quotation

@float BNF,characterCodeFig
@caption{Character Codes}
@display
@anchored{CharacterCode} ::= @code{'0c'} @refer{CharRef}
@end display
@end float

A @var{CharacterCode} has type @code{integer}.

@node Characters and Strings
@section Characters and Strings
@cindex character reference

@menu
* Character Reference::
* String Literals::
* Block String::
@end menu

@noindent
A @code{string} consists of a sequence of characters -- specifically
@refer{CharRef}s. There is no specific type for the characters
themselves -- instead, there are primitives for accessing individual
code points as @code{integer}s.

@quotation CAUTION
The reasons for this are due to the fact that Unicode @code{string}
values cannot be easily represented as a unique sequence.
@end quotation

@node Character Reference
@subsection Character Reference
@cindex character reference
@cindex syntax, character reference
@noindent
A @refer{CharRef} is a denotation of a single character.

@float BNF,charRefFig
@caption{Character Reference}
@display
@anchored{CharRef} ::= @refer{Char} | @refer{Escape}

@anchored{Char} ::= @var{CodePoint}

@anchored{Escape} ::= @code{'\b'} | @code{'\d'} | @code{'\e'} | @code{'\f'} | @code{'\n'} | @code{'\r'} | @code{'\t'} | @code{'\v'} |
   @code{'\'}@refer{Char} | @code{'\u'} @refer{Hex}@dots{}@refer{Hex}@code{';'}
@end display
@end float

@noindent
For most characters, the character reference for that character is the
character itself. For example, the string @code{"T"} contains the
character @code{T}. However, certain standard characters are normally
referenced by escape sequences consisting of a backslash character
followed by other characters; for example, the new-line character is
typically written @code{\n}. The standard escapes references are shown
in @pxref{CharEscape}.

@float Table,CharEscape
@caption{Character Escapes}
@multitable {LongishChar}{Long Description}
@headitem Char @tab Description
@item @code{\b}
@tab Back space
@item @code{\d}
@tab Delete
@item @code{\e}
@tab Escape
@item @code{\f}
@tab Form Feed
@item @code{\n}
@tab New line
@item @code{\r}
@tab Carriage return
@item @code{\t}
@tab Tab
@item @code{\v}
@tab Vertical Tab
@item @code{\u}@var{Hex}..@var{Hex};
@tab Unicode code point
@item @code{\ @var{Char}}
@tab The @var{Char} itself
@end multitable
@end float

Apart from the standard character references, there is a hex encoding
for directly encoding unicode characters that may not be available on
a given keyboard:
@example
\u34ff;
@end example

This notation accommodates the Unicode's varying width of character
codes -- from 8 bits through to 20 bits.

@node String Literals
@subsection String Literals
@cindex string
@cindex string literal
@cindex syntax,string literal
@cindex string,quoted

@noindent
A string is a sequence of character references (@pxref{CharRef}).

There are several forms of @emph{string literal}: a
@var{QuotedString}, a @var{BlockString} and a @var{RawString}.


@float BNF,quotedStringFig
@caption{String Literals}
@display
@anchored{StringLiteral} ::= @var{QuotedString} | @var{BlockString} | @var{RawString}

@anchored{QuotedString} ::= @code{'"'} @var{StrChar} @dots{} @var{StrChar} @code{'"'}

@anchored{StrChar} ::= @var{CharRef} | @var{Interpolation} | @var{Embedding}

@anchored{Interpolation} ::= @code{'$'} @code{'('} @var{Expression} @code{')'} [ @code{':'} @var{FormattingSpec} @code{';'} ] 

@anchored{FormattingSpec} ::= @var{CharRef} @dots{} @var{CharRef}

@anchored{Embedding} ::= @code{'#'} @code{'('} @var{Expression} @code{')'}

@anchored{RawString} ::= @code{'0'} @code{'"'} @var{CharRef} @dots{} @var{CharRef} @code{'"'}

@end display
@end float

@quotation TIP
Strings are @emph{not} permitted to contain the new-line character -- other
than as a character reference.
@end quotation

@example
"This string has a \nnew line in the middle"
@end example

@quotation Note
There are some subtle differences between @var{QuotedString}s and
@var{RawString}s (apart from the leading zero character):

@itemize
@item A @var{QuotedString} may have embedded interpolation expressions, for example
@example
"His name is $(Cat.name)"
@end example
@item A @var{RawString} may not have embedded interpolation expressions. In fact, such forms are treated as part of the string literal itself.
@item The type of a @var{QuotedString} is @code{string}, whereas the type of a @var{RawString} is @code{chars}.
@end itemize
@end quotation

@node Block String
@subsection Block String
@cindex strings,block form of
@cindex block of data

@noindent
In addition to the normal notation for strings, there is a block form
of string that permits raw character data to be processed as a string.

@float BNF,blockStringFig
@caption{Block String Literal}
@display
@anchored{BlockString} ::= @code{'"""'} @var{Char} @dots{} @var{Char} @code{'"""'}
@end display
@end float

@noindent
The block form of string allows any characters in the text and
performs no interpretation of those characters.

Block strings are written using triple quote characters at either
end. Any new-line characters enclosed by the block quotes are
considered to be part of the strings.

The normal interpretation of @code{$} and @code{#} characters as interpolation
markers is suppressed within a block string; as are any escape
characters' interpretations.

@example
"""This is a block string with $ and
uninterpreted \n characters"""
@end example

@quotation TIP
This form of string literal can be a convenient method for including
block text into a program source.
@end quotation

@node Identifiers
@section Identifiers
@cindex identifier

@noindent
Identifiers are used to denote operators, keywords and
variables. There are three main kinds of identifier: regular
alpha-numeric identifiers, graphic identifiers and quoted
identifiers. However, semantically, all these are essentially
equivalent: they all identify some variable or some type.

@menu
* Alphanumeric Identifiers::
* Graphic Identifiers::
* Quoted Identifiers::
* Standard Keywords::
@end menu

@node Alphanumeric Identifiers
@subsection Alphanumeric Identifiers
@cindex alpha numeric identifier

@noindent
Identifiers are based on the Unicode definition of identifier. For the
ASCII subset of characters, the definition corresponds to the common
form of identifier -- a letter followed by a sequence of digits and
letters. However, non-ASCII characters are also permitted in an
identifier.

@float BNF,identifierFig
@caption{Identifier Syntax}
@display
@anchored{Identifier} ::= @var{AlphaNumeric}
  | @var{GraphicIdentifier}
  | @var{QuotedIdentifier}

@anchored{AlphaNumeric} ::= @var{LeadChar} @var{BodyChar}@dots{}@var{BodyChar}

@anchored{LeadChar} ::= @var{LetterNumber}
  | @var{LowerCase}
  | @var{UpperCase}
  | @var{TitleCase}
  | @var{OtherNumber}
  | @var{OtherLetter}
  | @var{ConnectorPunctuation}

@anchored{BodyChar} ::= @var{LeadChar}
  | @var{ModifierLetter}
  | @var{Digit}
@end display
@end float

The terms @var{LetterNumber}, @var{ModifierLetter} and so on; referred to in
@ref{identifierFig} refer to standard character categories defined in
Unicode.

@quotation TIP
This definition of @ref{Identifier} closely follows the standard
definition of Identifier as contained in the Unicode specification.
@end quotation

@node Graphic Identifiers
@subsection Graphic Identifiers
@cindex graphic identifier
@cindex indentifier, graphic
@noindent
The standard operators often have a graphic form -- such as @code{+},
and @code{=<}. @ref{standardOperatorsTbl} contains a complete listing
of all the standard graphic-form identifiers.

@float BNF,graphicIdentifierFig
@caption{Graphic Identifiers}
@display
@anchored{GraphicIdentifier} ::= @var{SymbolicChar}@dots{}@var{SymbolicChar}

@anchored{SymbolicChar} ::= @var{Char} excepting @var{BodyChar}
@end display
@end float

The standard @var{GraphicIdentifier}s are listed in
Table~@ref{tokensTbl}. I.e, such identifiers are normally
also operators.

@quotation TIP
Apart from their graphic form there is no particular semantic
distinction between a graphic form identifier and a alphanumeric form
identifier. In fact, new graphical tokens may be introduced as a
result of declaring an operator -- see <<symbolicOperators>>.
@end quotation

@node Quoted Identifiers
@subsection Quoted Identifiers
@cindex identifier,quoted
@cindex quoted identifiers

@noindent
A quoted identifiers is denoted by a sequence of @var{charRef}s enclosed
in single quotes. Recall that strings are enclosed in double quotes.

@float BNF quotedIdentFig
@caption{Quoted Identifier}
@display
@anchored{QuotedIdentifier} ::= @code{'''} @var{CharRef}@dots{}@var{CharRef} @code{'''}
@end display
@end float

A quoted identifier suppresses any operator or keyword interpretation
that the identifier might otherwise have.

@quotation TIP
This can be useful for external facing interfaces where, for example,
the name of a field in a structure must have a particular form -- even
if that would otherwise be a keyword.
@end quotation

@node Standard Keywords
@subsection Standard Keywords
@cindex standard keywords
@cindex keywords

@noindent
There are a number of keywords which are reserved by the language --
these may not be used as identifiers or in any other role.

@quotation TIP
On those occasions where it is important to have an identifier that is
a keyword it is possible to achieve this by enclosing the keyword in
single quotes.

For example, while @code{type} is a keyword in the language; enclosing
the word in parentheses: @code{'type'} has the effect of suppressing
the keyword interpretation -- even though the printed representations
are the same.

Enclosing a name in parentheses also has the effect of suppressing any
operator information about the name.
@end quotation

@node Punctuation
@section Punctuation
@cindex punctuation

@noindent
There are relatively few punctuation symbols; although it has a large
number of graphical identifiers, which are defined in @ref{Graphic
Identifiers}.

@menu
* End of Term::
* Parentheses::
* Square Brackets::
* Braces::
* Special Brackets::
@end menu

@node End of Term
@subsection End of Term

With a few exceptions, statements @footnote{A statement in @Star{}
is not to be confused with statements in languages like C or Java:
statements in @Star{} always declare some fact.} are terminated by the @var{Terminator} -- which consists of a period followed by white space character.

@float BNF,terminatorFig
@caption{Statement Terminator}
@display
@anchored{Terminator} ::= @code{'.'} @refer{WhiteSpace}
@end display
@end float

The exceptions are:
@itemize
@item After a brace.
If a statement's last character is a brace, then it does not need to
be terminated with a @var{Terminator}. This mimics C-style
conventions.

@item The last definition
If a statement is the last in a sequence of statements that are
enclosed in braces, then it does not need termination.
@end itemize

@node Parentheses
@subsection Parentheses
@cindex parentheses

Parentheses are @emph{active}: they are not simply a
means of grouping expressions and/or overriding precedences of
operators. This is because parentheses have two distinct roles: to
group and/or override precedences, and as a way of enclosing tuples of
terms.

@node Square Brackets
@subsection Square Brackets
@cindex square brackets

Square brackets (@code{[} and @code{]}) are used to delimit certain
kinds of list and sequence expressions.

@node Braces
@subsection Braces
@cindex braces

Braces are used to delimit groups of statements.

There are two forms of braces: with and without a period character.

@float BNF bracesFig
@caption{Braces}
@display
@anchored{Brace} ::= @code{'@{'} | @code{'@}'} | @code{'@{.'} | @code{'.@}'}
@end display
@end float

They must be appropriately paired: a @code{@{} must be paired with a
subsequent @code{@}}; and similarly the @code{@{.} must be paired with
@code{.@}}.

@node Special Brackets
@subsection Special Brackets

There are several @emph{special} sets of brackets:

@float BNF specialBrFig
@caption{Special Brackets}
@display
@anchored{SpecialBracket} ::= @code{'(|'} | @code{'|)'} |
  @code{'[|'} | @code{'|]'} |
  @code{'<|'} | @code{'|>'}
@end display
@end float

As with other brackets, these must be appropriately paired. Each one
of these special bracket pairs takes a single term as argument --
unlike the @code{'()'} and @code{'[]'} brackets which take comma
separated sequences.







