@node Patterns
@chapter Patterns
@cindex patterns
Patterns are templates that are used to match against a value;
possibly binding one or more variables to components of the matched
value. Patterns are used as guards in equations, as filters in query
expressions and in @code{for} loops. Patterns represent one of the
fundamental mechanisms that can guide the course of a computation.

@float BNF,patternsFig
@caption{Patterns}
@display
@anchored{Pattern}::=@refer{ScalarPattern}
  | @refer{Variable}
  | @refer{ConstructorPattern}
  | @refer{TuplePattern}
  | @refer{AnonymousRecordPattern}
  | @refer{GuardedPattern}
  | @refer{SequencePattern}
@end display
@end float

@quotation Patterns and Types
@cindex patterns,type of
Every pattern has a type associated with it. This is the type of
values that the pattern is valid to match against. In the type safety
productions involving patterns, we use the same meta predicate:
@typeprod{E,P,T} as for expressions.
@end quotation

@node Variables in Patterns
@section Variables in Patterns
@cindex pattern,variable pattern
@cindex variables
@anchor{patternVariables}
Variables in patterns are used to bind variables to elements of the
input being matched against.

@quotation Note
A repeated occurrence of a variable in a pattern is equivalent to a
call to the @code{==} predicate. For example, the pattern:
@example
(X,Y,X)
@end example

is equivalent to the @refer{GuardedPattern}:
@example
(X,Y,X1) where X==X1
@end example

The @code{==} predicate is defined in the standard @code{equality}
contract (see @refer{EqualityContract}); and therefore, the call and
the pattern may not be valid if @code{equality} is not implemented for
the type of @code{X}.
@end quotation

@node Scope of Pattern Variables
@subsection Scope of Pattern Variables
@cindex variables,scope of
A pattern always occurs in the context of a @emph{scope extension} -- a new potential scope for variables. For example, in the equation:
@example
fact(N) => N*fact(N-1)
@end example
the pattern on the left hand side of the equation:
@example
fact(N)
@end example
introduces variables that are in scope on the right hand side of the equation:
@example
N*fact(N-1)
@end example

@node Anonymous Variable Pattern
@subsection Anonymous Variable Pattern
The special identifier -- @code{_} -- is used on those occasions where
a filler of some kind is needed. Every occurrence of @code{_} refers
to a different variable. A match with @code{_} is always successful,
but the value itself is ignored.

@node Scalar Literal Patterns
@section Scalar Literal Patterns

@float BNF,scalarLiteralPtnFig
@caption{Scalar Patterns}
@display
@anchored{ScalarPattern}::= @refer{StringLiteral}
  | @refer{NumericLiteral}
@end display
@end float  

@node Literal String Patterns
@subsection Literal String Patterns
@cindex string,pattern
@cindex patterns,literal string

A literal string as a pattern matches exactly that string; the type of
a string pattern is @code{string}.

@quotation Note
The operators that are used to denoted string interpolation
expressions (see @refer{stringInterpolation}) must @emph{not} be used
in string patterns. In particular, the dollar character
@emph{must} be quoted in a string pattern.
@end quotation

For example, in the function:
@example
hasDollar("has$") => true
@end example
the string pattern @code{"has$"} is not legal. You should use:
@example
hasDollar("has\$") => true
@end example


@node Literal Numbers
@subsection Literal Numbers
@cindex number pattern
@cindex patterns,literal number

A literal number -- @code{integer} or @code{float} -- as a pattern
matches exactly that number.

The type of the pattern depends on the type of the number literal:
@code{integer} literals have type @code{integer}, @code{float}
literals have type @code{float}.

@node Constructor Patterns
@section Constructor Patterns
@cindex constructor,pattern
@cindex patterns,constructor

A constructor pattern denotes an occurrence of a value that has been
declared within an algebraic type definition (see
@refer{AlgebraicTypeDefinition}).

A constructor pattern mimics the form of the constructor definition
itself: for a @refer{PositionalConstructorLiteral} it consists of an
identifier followed by a sequence of patterns, enclosed in parentheses
and separated by commas, denoting the arguments to the
@refer{PositionalConstructorLiteral}.

@float BNF,constructorPtnFig
@caption{Constructor Pattern}
@display
@anchored{ConstructorPattern}::= @refer{EnumeratedSymbolPattern}
  | @refer{PositionalConstructorPattern}
  | @refer{RecordConstructorPattern}
@end display
@end float  

@quotation Note
@refer{PositionalConstructorPattern}s are the only way that a
constructor value may be inspected and elements of it extracted. There
are no indexing operators over because it is not possible to give a
consistent typing to such operators.
@end quotation

@node Enumerated Symbol Patterns
@subsection Enumerated Symbol Patterns
@cindex patterns,enumerated symbol
@cindex enumerated symbol pattern

An enumerated symbol -- as a pattern -- matches the same symbol
only.

@float BNF,enumeratedPtnFig
@caption{Enumerated Symbol Pattern}
@display
@anchored{EnumeratedSymbolPattern}::= @refer{Identifier}
@end display
@end float  

@node Positional Constructor Patterns
@subsection Positional Constructor Patterns
@cindex patterns,positional constructor
@cindex positional constructor patterns
@anchor{posConPattern}
A positional constructor pattern consists of a constructor label
followed by the argument patterns -- as introduced in the appropriate
@refer{AlgebraicTypeDefinition}.

@float BNF,positionalConstructorPtnFig
@caption{Positional Constructor Pattern}
@display
@anchored{PositionalConstructorPattern}::= @refer{Identifier} @code{'('} @refer{Pattern}@code{','} @dots{}@code{','} @refer{Pattern}@code{')'}
@end display
@end float  

@node Record Patterns
@subsection Record Patterns
@cindex patterns,record constructor
@cindex record constructor pattern

A record pattern consists of the record label, followed by attribute
patterns enclosed in braces.

Each attribute pattern takes the form:
@example
@refer{Identifier} = @refer{Pattern}
@end example
where @emph{Pattern} is a pattern that the @refer{Identifier}
attribute must satisfy.

Unlike positional constructor patterns, it is not required for all of
the attributes to be mentioned in a record constructor pattern. At its
limit, a pattern of the form:
@example
label@{@}
@end example

becomes a test that the @code{label} record literal is present -- with
no constraints on the attributes of the record.

@float BNF,recordConstructorPtnFig
@caption{Record Constructor Pattern}
@display
@anchored{RecordConstructorPattern} ::= @refer{Identifier} @code{'@{'} @refer{AttributePattern}@code{'.'} @dots{} @code{'.'} @refer{AttributePattern}@code{'@}'}

@anchored{AttributePattern} ::= @refer{Identifier} @code{'='} @refer{Pattern}
@end display
@end float

@node Tuple Patterns
@section Tuple Patterns
@cindex patterns,tuple

A tuple pattern consists of a tuple with patterns as the elements of the tuple.

@float BNF,tuplePtnFig
@caption{Tuple Pattern}
@display
@anchored{TuplePattern}::= @code{'('} @refer{Pattern}@code{','} @dots{}@code{','} @refer{Pattern}@code{')'}
@end display
@end float  

Such anonymous tuple patterns can be used to extract values from tuple
values (@refer{TupleLiteral}). For example, the pattern @code{(X,Y)}
in the query condition:
@example
(X,Y) in R
@end example
matches against the elements of @code{R} and `binds' the local
variables @code{X} and @code{Y} to the first and second tuple member
of each successive elements of @code{R}.

@quotation Note
As noted in @refer{TupleType}, anonymous tuples are essentially
syntactic sugar for automatically defined algebraic types. The above
query is equivalent to:
@example
$2(X,Y) in R
@end example
Noting, of course, that @code{$2} is not a legal @refer{Identifier}.
@end quotation

@node Anonymous Record Patterns
@subsection Anonymous Record Patterns
@cindex matching anonymous records
@cindex pattern,anonymous record
@cindex anonymous record pattern

An anonymous record pattern is written in an analogous form to the
regular record pattern, except that there is no label prefixed to it.

@float BNF,anonRecordPtnFig
@caption{Anonymous Record Pattern}
@display
@anchored{AnonymousRecordPattern} ::= @code{'@{'} @refer{AttributePattern}@code{'.'} @dots{} @code{'.'} @refer{AttributePattern}@code{'@}'}
@end display
@end float

For example,
@example
@{name=N. address=A @} in R
@end example
uses an anonymous record pattern to match elements of the list @code{R}.

@quotation Note
Unlike with most other patterns, the type checker is generally
@emph{not} able to reliably infer the type of an anonymous record
pattern. As a result, it must @emph{always} be the case that the
anonymous record pattern occurs in a context where the type may be
inferred. In the above example, the type of the anonymous record
pattern:

@example
@{name=N. address=A@}
@end example
can be inferred from the context it occurs in, and the type of
@code{R}. However, if @code{R}'s type is not already known by other
means, then a syntax error will result.

The reason for this is that, like other record patterns, an anonymous
record pattern need not contain an element for every attribute
defined.
@end quotation

@node Guarded Patterns
@section Guarded Patterns
@anchored{guardPattern}
@cindex patterns,guarded
@cindex guarded patterns

A guarded pattern attaches a semantic condition on a pattern. It
consists of a pattern, followed by the @code{where} keyword and a
predication condition -- all enclosed in parentheses.

Guarded patterns are useful in enhancing the specificity of patterns
-- which apart from guarded patterns are purely syntactic in nature.

@float BNF,guardedPtnFig
@caption{Guarded Pattern}
@display
@anchored{GuardedPattern} ::= @refer{Pattern} @code{'where'} @refer{Condition}
@end display
@end float

A guarded pattern has a type assignment based on the type of the left
hand side, and the type safety of the condition.

@node Sequence Patterns
@section Sequence Patterns

A sequence pattern represents a use of the standard @code{stream}
contract (see @ref{streamContractProg}) to match sequences of values.

@cindex sequence,patterns
@cindex patterns,sequence

@node Sequence Pattern Notation
@subsection Sequence Pattern Notation

@float BNF,sequencePtnFig
@caption{Sequence Pattern}
@display
@anchored{SequencePattern} ::= @code{'['} @refer{PtnSequence} @code{']'}

@anchored{PtnSequence} ::= @refer{Pattern}[@code{'..,'}@refer{Pattern}]@code{','} @dots{} @code{','} @refer{Pattern}[@code{',..'}@refer{Pattern}
@end display
@end float

In a similar way to @refer{SequenceExpression}s,
@refer{SequencePattern} depend on the @code{stream} contract, In fact,
a @refer{SequencePattern} is syntactic sugar for terms involving the
@code{stream} contract -- which is defined in
@refer{streamContractProg}.

A pattern of the form:

@example
[@var{Ptn@sub{1}}, @dots{}, @var{Ptn@sub{n}}]
@end example

is equivalent to the pattern:
@example
Str where (@var{Ptn@sub{1}},X1) ^= _hdtl(Str) &&
    ...
    (@var{Ptn@sub{n}},Xn) ^= _hdtl(Xn-1) &&
    Xn == _nil
@end example

